# LatentHost V2: Probabilistic host attribution using mobile genetic elements through Bayesian latent class analysis.
A Bayesian latent class model (BLCM) to systematically integrate multiple accessory elements for probabilistic assignment of host-origins.



## Introduction
 
Detection of mobile genetic elements in conjunction with core-genome features (phylogenetic clades or cgmlst) may identify zoonotic spillover and host switch events. We applied Bayesian latent class model (BLCM) approach that assumes the host-origin for each isolate is in an unobserved class of human, turkey, pork and chicken, with further stratification into three major clades based on core phylogeny. 

BLCM uses multivariate binary responses that indicate presence or absence of 17 host-associated accessory elements, identified previously, to infer the latent host-origins. The latent classes and model parameters can be learned in an unsupervised fashion or using a training set. Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms are used to iteratively produce samples from the posterior distribution of the unobserved host-origins, based on which we calculate posterior probabilities of host-origins for each isolate.



## Pipeline Structure:
Refer to **[Host_Element_GitHub.pdf](pipeline_modules/Host_Element_GitHub.pdf)** for an infographic overview of the pipeline. It also includes command line instructions on how to run the modules. Note: MLST is a necessary part of the pipeline, but not included directly in this repo. Please install and use MLST by **[tseemann](https://github.com/tseemann/mlst)** or by **[Genomic Epidemiology (CGE) MLST](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/mlst/src/master/)**.

### [example_run](example_run/)
Example run of the pipeline from start to end using 5 publicly availabe E. coli genomes. Please utilize this to cross-check to ensure your pipeline has been correctly installed and run for each of the modules.

### [pipeline_modules](pipeline_modules/)
* **conda_envs** - contains yaml files to install the necessary conda enviroments used in the pipeline modules.
* **cgmlstFinder** - performs cgmlst identification using Genomic Epidemiology (CGE) **[cgMLSTFinder](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/cgmlstfinder/src/master/)**. This has been modified to convert and utilize **[md5 versions of sequences](pipeline_modules/cgmlstFinder/cgMLSTFinder_git/CGE_cgMLST_md5_converter.py)**
* **kmodes** - performs **[kmodes](https://pypi.org/project/kmodes/)** supervised predictions using feature data based on cgMLST with a pre-trained model.
* **host_element_pipeline** - Utilizes **[mmseq2](https://github.com/soedinglab/MMseqs2)** to search for host-associated accessory elements within the E. coli genomes and generate a presence absence matrix.
* **host_element_blcm** - combines the results generated by the 4 modules: MLST, cgmlstFinder, kmodes, host_element_pipeline into an input csv file to be fed into the Bayesian latent class model (BLCM) to probabilistic host attribution.


# Features:

## MLST
Please install and use MLST by **[tseemann](https://github.com/tseemann/mlst)** or by **[Genomic Epidemiology (CGE) MLST](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/mlst/src/master/)**.

The example used in this pipeline is the **[Genomic Epidemiology (CGE) MLST](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/mlst/src/master/)**. The ST number is parsed and pulled from the results.txt file under "**Sequence Type:**" line and then compiled into a single two column **mlst_calls.txt**.

Please note the the **[database used is ecoli](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/mlst_db/src/master/)**, but this is dependent on the version used in the CGE mlst software. At the time of checking the database (1/20/2026) it is named ecoli1 now.

**[Example of MLST](example_run/mlstfinder/)** 
```
sbatch run_mlstfinder.sh \
	example_data \ 
	mlstfinder_samplelist.txt \
	ecoli \
	example_test_run_mlstfinder
```

## cgMLST and Kmodes 
Similarly to MLST, the cgMLST comes from **[Enterobase](https://enterobase.readthedocs.io/en/latest/enterobase-tutorials/deeper-lineages.html?highlight=cgmlst)**. The core genome MLST sequences are identified, extracted, and converted to MD5 to standardize typing and remove the numbering scheme. The results are compiled from **ecoli_results_md5_conversion.txt** with each column representing one of the cgmlst alleles, into **kmodes_ready_inputfile.txt**.

**[Example of cgMLST](example_run/cgmlstfinder)**
```
bash cgmlstFinder_Submitter.sh \
	example_data \
	cgmlstfinder_samplelist.txt \
	example_test_run
```

**[Example of kmodes](example_run/cgmlstfinder/example_test_run_output/compiled_files)**
```
python kmodes_clustering_prediction.py \
	example_test_run_kmodes_ready_inputfile__Cluster_2__kmodes_cgmlst_clustering_predictions.csv \
	FULL_sb27_training_context_kmodes_output_Cluster_2_model.pkl
```

Both the **kmodes_clustering_prediction.py** and **FULL_sb27_training_context_kmodes_output_Cluster_2_model.pkl** comes from the pipeline_modules/kmodes folder.

## host_element_pipeline
The host_element_pipeline utilizes mmseq2 to search through inputted E. coli genomes for key **[host-associated accessory elements](pipeline_modules/host_element_pipeline/databases/20250818_elementgeneList.fasta)**. The results are parsed using python and compiled into a presence absence matrix, along with meaningful statistics grouped by sequencing hosts for the elements.

**[Example of host_element_pipeline](example_run/host_element_pipeline)**
```
sbatch host_element_pipeline_Submitter.sh \
	example_data \
	host_element_pipeline_samplelist.txt \
	host_element_pipeline_hostlabels.txt \
	example_test_run_host_element_pipeline
```


## host_element_blcm

Once all previous modules have been completed and the information generated, they are combined into a baseline csv file that will be the input for the BLCM modeling, containing both context and the new E. coli genomes needed for predictions.

* Excludes_beef version - **Excludes** columns within the baseline csv file related to Beef as a class.
* Includes_beef version - **Includes** columns within the baseline csv file related to Beef as a class.

Please make sure to use the correct blcm version depending on your sequencing hosts.


Manual Steps are followed to generate the Modified version of the baseline csv file that can be found within the **host_element_blcm** folder respective versions.
1. Copy the _any_element_presence_input_bigfuti_dcfuti.csv from the respective blcm version.
2. Append the respective information for each sample you want to add the follow columns names from:
	1. kmodes_cgmlst_clustering_predictions.csv -- kmodes module output
	2. host_element_pipeline_element_presence.tsv - host_element_pipeline module output
	3. host labels combinations
	4. MLST
	5. Training Column set to 0 (this will generate predictions for them)

**[Example of host_element_blcm](example_run/host_element_blcm/)**
```
sbatch run_hostelement_blca.sh \
	MODIFIED_082025_any_element_presence_input_bigfuti_dcfuti.csv \
	example_test_run_blcm
```


The **pred_scores.csv** contains your final probability predictions for each of your inputted E. coli genomes, along with some standardized check genomes from our own dataset, included in the baseline csv.

## Citation
Methods paper - Coming soon

For now if you use BLCM - Host Elements, please cite:

**[Using source-associated mobile genetic elements to identify zoonotic extraintestinal E.coli infections](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352771423000381)**

```
Cindy M. Liu, Maliha Aziz, Daniel E. Park, Zhenke Wu, Marc Stegger, Mengbing Li, Yashan Wang, Kara Schmidlin, Timothy J. Johnson, Benjamin J. Koch, Bruce A. Hungate, Lora Nordstrom, Lori Gauld, Brett Weaver, Diana Rolland, Sally Statham, Brantley Hall, Sanjeev Sariya, Gregg S. Davis, Paul S. Keim, James R. Johnson, Lance B. Price,
Using source-associated mobile genetic elements to identify zoonotic extraintestinal E. coli infections,
One Health, 2023, 100518, ISSN 2352-7714, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onehlt.2023.100518.
```
